There are various theories as to where the term “Viking” originated; one looks to the feminine prefix ‘vík’, meaning ‘inlet’ or ‘bay’, while others claim the historic Norwegian settlement of Viken is where the name derives (hence, Vikings were the original “dwellers of Viken”). 
Alternatively, recognised etymologists such as Anatoly Liberman point to the Old Norse word ‘vika’, meaning ‘sea mile’, the space left between two rowing boats in convoy, while others refer to the 9th Century Anglo-Saxon poem, Widsith, which refers to Scandinavian pirates as “Wicings”. 

Regardless, given the Scandinavians’ dominance of the sea during this early period, it wasn’t long until contrasting names were being offered up by various other cultures across the planet. The Arabs, Slavs and Byzantines, for example, knew of these raiders as ‘Rus'’ or ‘Rhōs’ (relating to ‘rowing’), while the Germans labelled them as Ascomanni ("Ashmen"), alluding to their ash wood boats. 
Other nations such as the English and Celts settled merely on Danes, Heathens or Pagans, whilst the Irish referred to them as ‘Dubgail’ and ‘Finngail’ ( ‘dark’ and ‘fair foreigners’) or, quite suitably, ‘Northmen’.

Given the common cultural practice of tormenting coastal settlements and monasteries, it wasn’t long until the Viking’s fearsome reputation spread to almost all corners of Europe and Mesopotamia—there is even evidence that the Vikings reached Baghdad, the centre of the Islamic Empire at the time. 
The Viking Age, as commonly referred to, lasted from the early 790s to the Norman Conquest of England in 1066. Throughout this period, the Vikings used the Northern and Baltic seas to terrorise neighbouring kingdoms, extending their influence through combat and culture until, eventually, Vikings could no longer be merely described as coastal raiders. 

Consider the facts; two Viking kings, Sweyn Forkbeard and Cnut the Great, would ascend the English throne. Leif Erikson (an early Icelander) would settle short-lived colonies in North America. Scandinavians would even serve as mercenaries for the Byzantine Empire. In short, these were no mere pirates, but the forefathers of a patchwork-quilt culture.  
The motivations for such expansion are subject to debate for modern historians, though there are clear incentives as to why the population of Scandinavia might have acted in the way that they did during this 200 year period. One relatively apparent reason is a scarcity of resources, thus forcing the Vikings to look further afield, even robbing and killing classes of people blessed with a more bountiful homeland. 
Another possible stimulus is the rule of Charlemagne and the religious persecution that went hand-in-hand with it. With Christian influence seeping ever further into Denmark, Sweden and Norway, it makes logical sense that the Vikings were looking to protect their pagan belief system, resist Judeo-Christian values and even take revenge for those settlements already lost to a monotheistic devotion. This is not speculation; the introduction of Christianity would come to divide Norway for almost half a century, causing untold bloodshed and cultural transformation.

It should also be noted that during the Viking Age, Scandinavia’s closest neighbours were experiencing varying levels of inner turmoil, thus granting the Vikings an advantage when exploiting these lands for wealth, slaves or territory. The sea routes used by the Vikings were almost entirely free of opposition, leaving the raiders unimpeded as they travelled from one destination of plunder to the next. 

This breakdown in what had once been a profitable network of trade routes for European kingdoms can be heralded back as far as the collapse of the Roman Empire in the 5th Century, and later, to the rapid 7th Century expansion of Islamic philosophy.
The end of the Viking Age can be pinned down to a number of factors. First of all, the fallout that occurred following the Christianisation of Scandinavia would have untold effects on the region’s domestic and foreign policy.

By the 12th Century, Denmark, Norway and Sweden were effectively controlled by dioceses legitimised by the Catholic Church and had firmly established themselves as separate Kingdoms. This meant an enormous cultural shift in the priorities of Scandinavia’s leadership; in that sense, the Vikings were not defeated, but arguably, made to behave in a manner that fit the civility of their quickly transforming homelands. 

For example, the medieval church made it forbidden to take fellow Christians as slaves. Given the fact that slave-trading was the number one source of profit for the Vikings, this removed a great deal of the economic incentive to travel and raid overseas. The new leadership also chose to refocus their military attention from the kingdoms of the west and, instead, partake in such campaigns as the Baltic Wars and the attempted conquest of Jerusalem. 

From here on out, it seemed, the Vikings were no longer a recognised force in the world, though their brutality, bravery and strength would long be remembered by those who had once felt the sharp edge of their battleaxe.