source: https://pradiptadh.wordpress.com/author/pradiptadh/
Some people may already know the history of Toba Lake located in North Sumatra Province. But for those of you who do not know the story behind the formation of Lake Toba, this time there is some information that will be discussed. Curious as what? Read it down!

Toba Lake is one of the largest lakes in Southeast Asia, and is a volcanic lake in the middle there is an island called Samosir Island. The majority of the population around Toba Lake is Batak tribe.

It is estimated that Toba Lake was formed during an explosion of about 73,000-75,000 years ago which is an eruption Supervolcano (super volcano) that is Mount Toba. Wind-blown volcanic ash has spread to half the earth, from China to South Africa. Even quite surprising because it turns out the spread of the dust to be recorded up to the North Pole. The eruption occurred for one week and the dust burst reached 10 kilometers above sea level. The evidence found also reinforces the notion that the force of the eruption and its ocean waves could annihilate life in Atlantis.

This incident caused mass death followed by the extinction of some species. According to DNA evidence, this eruption also shrank the number of people to about 60% of the total human population of the earth at that time, about 60 million people.

After the eruption, a caldera was formed which then filled with water and became what is now known as Toba Lake. Upward pressure by the magma that has not yet come out causes the emergence of Samosir Island.

There is also folklore about Toba Lake is, said he said a time when there was a farmer named Toba who went fishing to the river to get fish to eat. Toba gets a big and beautiful fish, but he is surprised that the fish can talk. Apparently the fish is the incarnation of a princess who was cursed for violating the rules of the kingdom. As a thank you for having released her from the curse, the princess was marry Toba. However, there is one promise that has been agreed upon, they should not tell anyone that the princess is a fish.

From the marriage was born a boy named Samosir. Samosir grew into a very handsome and strong boy, but there are habits that amaze everyone. He always feels hungry and never satisfied, all the food rations are always devoured without the rest. Until one day Samosir assigned to deliver food for his father in the field, but the food never came. Toba also approached Samosir and asked where the food for him, but Samosir admitted that the food is already eaten. Toba was very angry and unknowingly breaks his promise by saying “Son of a fish!”

Samosir immediately complained to his mother if he called a Son of a fish, the princess was disappointed because her husband has broken the promise. She cried a lot and told Samosir to run to the high hill. Suddenly very heavy rain came down with a terrible lightning, the water overflowed to drown the entire village. The puddle turned into a lake that is now called Toba Lake, then the island where Samosir shelter is called Samosir Island.

That’s the history of Toba Lake, that’s so unique right? If you visit Toba Lake you can feel the cool atmosphere of the lake accompanied by beautiful views of Samosir Island.